The next topic we're gonna tackle
is type checking at runtime.
And what I mean by this is
really just type guards.
So performing full type
checking at runtime is like,
it's possible there exist projects that
try to use TypeScript in order to do this.
It is quite expensive,
it's very expensive.
If you've ever used React PropTypes and
scaled that up to a very large app,
it slows things down considerably
because it's doing a lot of comparisons
against all types of values.
Anytime you pass through
a component boundary,
it's really having to do
a substantial amount of extra work.
So this is a piece of type
checking we can do at runtime, and
by that I mean a type guard is
where compile-time type information
joins runtime behavior that
matches that type information.
It's incredibly important
that these be good.
This is a place for
imperfections in types or
imperfections in checking
can result in code looking
like it's OK and
having very mysterious behavior.
So if you're gonna focus on
correctness in one place,
focus on it for type guards.
So what we wanna do here
is add some type checking
to our data layer like
our source/data folder.
And we did a little bit, right?
We found that some of these files here.
We have a return type here, but
effectively we're casting, right?
We're saying here's the API call,
it returns a promise any.
Here's an any,
we can state that we are returning
a promise that resolves to an i channel.
But are we really sure?
And any works,
it works in that it could be anything.
TypeScript's trying to be flexible here.
But I want us to introduce some real
checking here as data enters our app to
make sure that this is what we hope it is.
And to start,
what we're gonna do is create another file
in our source folder
called type-guards.ts.
And we're gonna add
a couple of guards in here.
We're gonna first say.
Isteam.
And if you use GitHub Copilot,
it's often pretty good at this,
it's this is a terrible suggestion
[LAUGH] it's giving me right now.
It's literally just casting Iteam.
Yeah, that's pretty awful.
Here's what we're gonna do instead,
we're first gonana say if type of arg
equals object, and let's see.
Let's look pull up what
an Iteam looks like right here
on the side, there it is, and.
See this is a much better thing here.
I still don't like the casting, but
this is more along the lines of
what we're trying to do here.
Get rid of this.
So if it's an object.
And typeof arg.icon
URL And
I think we'll have to do, and.
There we go, sorry, it's.
Tough to talk and type and
think at the same time.
So I'm gonna just create
a bunch of those and
we're gonna do this for
name and for channels.
We'll do another check on channels here.
So this will be name.
This will be, sorry,
this will be channels.
And then see icon URL name,
channels and Id.
Add one more up here.
And here we can change this to.
IsArray(channels).
We have to actually do the first
one first, that's right.
There we go, okay, so effectively this is
like an exhaustive check for ITeam.
Now we could do something a bit more here.
We're gonna build that out but this is
the pattern we kind of wanna follow here.
So we could say return.
And thanks to like early termination,
anything that doesn't really match this
it'll short-circuit as soon as it
hit something that it's gonna break.
So just to break this up so
people can see it more easily.
That's kind of the pattern, we're
gonna do this just for one type here,
and then we're gonna make an array,
like a typed array check as well.
You could do this, of course,
for the other types, right?
For ischannel, isteam,
something like that.
So now I'm gonna do export
function is typed array.
And we're gonna take an unknown
array as our argument,
and a wow, now TypeScript's
getting a little more clever.
So a guard which is a function
that returns something like that.
We're gonna flesh this out here,
I still have to do stuff here.
And then we're going to say, all right
we now know that this is an array
of some sort, and
if we want this to be a typed array,
we kind of need this to
be a generic function.
So we'd say isTypedArray is generic
over the type of thing in the array.
We take in an array of Ts,
we return an indication that
arg is in fact an array of T sorry,
we would take an array of unknowns.
Right, those are the things
that we have to test.
Here's what our guard looks like.
So we're gonna be able to infer
the thing we're checking for
based on the guard and we can kind
of get to work implementing here.
There's something I haven't done yet,
but I wanna leave it as a surprise.
Well, and that is the implementation here.
We check to see if it's an array,
and then array.every,
it determines whether all the members
of an array satisfy the specified test.
This wouldn't.
I guess this would work but
there's something we could do to make
this even a little bit more rigorous.
We can say, I don't just want you to pass
me a function that returns a Boolean,
I want you to pass me a function that's
actually a type guard for type T.
Of course, this is a subset of
what we had there before, right,
it's a special Boolean,
a Boolean that has special meaning.
So what this will let us
do something like this.
Just this is a demo we'll bring it back
into the code in a more meaningful way.
And see people like furiously
cutting things down.
Did we do something wrong here?
Isteam is typed array, team array.
That's interesting.
>> I think if you provided
the right argument.
>> I have to, yeah, I don't get
inference cuz this is not a type param.
What if we did this to force it to
infer based on the return type?
Hey, there we go.
So, [LAUGH] this is a really
subtle piece of behavior here.
I add this and as this function,
it's going through,
it's trying to figure out what T is.
The first thing it's gonna hit is to test,
and it'll say, hey, you gave me unknown.
But if I type it like this, it won't be
able to infer anything based on this.
It'll just look at the return type of
the type guard, not the Boolean, but
the thing it is checking for.
So that's what gets us this result.
See, it's an Iteam array compared to this.
It's an array of unknowns,
cuz it was like, well,
I will just use the argument you're
taking in, and this is an unknown.
That's a tricky one.
Okay, now we actually,
this is a really useful type guard.
We can scan through an array,
apply a type guard to each member.
We have a nice concise
syntax that we can use here.
Let's go back,
let's find a place where we can use this.
So we can go into our data layer,
maybe our teams.ts.
And we've got to get all teams here,
right?
Makes an API call, returns a promise
that resolves to something like to any.
What we can do here is add a .then,
remember applying type
guards you are running code.
We'll call this.
Maybe teams or response data.
If is typed array,
pass in the response data.
And what's the problem here?
We're not always returning.
Something like that,
we didn't import this I suspect.
So look at that response data going in,
it's an any coming out.
It's an array of iteams.
Ultimately, what this whole
chain ends up returning
is a promise that resolves
to an array of Iteams.
And this, by the way, gives us a much
better clue as to what we're caching here,
like what's happening here.
And so we know this is now a promise
that resolves to an array of Iteams.
So now this function, it actually
lives up to what it's supposed to be,
cuz we added a nice type guard here.
All paths lead to returning an array
of Iteams regardless of whether you get
the cache hit or the cache miss.